
# Project Code Book - Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set
by: Joseph M. Kamt

## Motivation
- The data set as raw data gives little insight into several aims of the study, such as, but not limited to, measuring the 
  accuracy of the data generated by the Samsung mobile device, evaluating trigger movements such as specific acceleration data
  to set as the beggining, or ending, of exercise activities, calibrating the X/Y/Z sensors on the device, etc.
- We begin by assesing that the most effective grouping of the data would consist on getting the average data of the routines
  carried and information as setting its mean and standard deviation.

A description of the source of the data and the authors of the study can be found in:
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

The zip file containing the raw data of the test and training subjects can be found in:
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

## 1. Getting acces to the data and understanding its structure

The zip file from the source mentiones above contained a folder with the folloring elments:
- Test folder, containing all the relevant text files of the test group of subjects.
- Train Folder, containing all the relevant text files of the group of subjects in the official data generated.
- Activity labels, a text file with the description of each category of activities/exercises carried by the subjects.
- Two text files of features info, basically the description of the measured variables and various statistics on the X/Y/Z axis
  of the Samsung mobile device.
- A readme file with the description of the text files included in folders, and what type of infomration is included in each
  one.

It is important to mention at this point that the text files contained within the folders of "Inertial Signals" are not of 
interest at this point. They contain information about the sensors of the Samsung device, and a collection of relevant data
to it. However, at this point we are interested on the information stored by each subject in each experiment.


## 2. Merged the training and the test sets to create one data set

As mentioned, there exists two set of group experiments: test and train. We attempt to load all the relevant txt files to the
study. These files include:
- Test Set - "X_test.txt", "y_test.txt", "subject_test.txt"
- Train Set - "X_train.txt", "y_train.txt", "subject_train.txt"
- Support Data - "activity_labels.txt", "features.txt"

Each data in each set contains the same amount of rows for the test and train subjects. We identify that the file
"features.txt" contains the variable names in the same order for the columns of the main data sets of files "X_test.txt" and 
"X_train.txt". We proceed to match these files with the corresponding information. In addition, we merge all files in each
data set with cbinf function, adding the descriptive titles for the rest of columns in the process. Once we have both sets
we proceed to merge their rows with the rbind function. Notice that we keep the same order of columns for both data sets for 
a correct implementation.

## 3. Extracting only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.

The corresponding index vector for each columns, that contains the mean and standard deviation of each value measured for
each experiment, is generated. We accomplish this by applying the grep function with the relevant text elements for all the 
columns to be included in the first tidy dataset.

## 4. Matching descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set

The support data "activity_labels" is used to match the description of the activites in the given fil with the activity
category in the first tidy set generated in step 3. This is carried by applying the merge function.

## 5. Labeling appropriately the data set with descriptive variable names

This is accomplished by previously employing the make.names function, which takes all the column names in the "features.txt"
file, and sets unduplicated valid descriptive names accepted by R and the plyr and dplyr packages.

## 6. Creating a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject

At the end of step 5 we end up with a data frame of each subject, each experiment/activity carried by subjects, and the 
corresponding mean and standard deviation of each X/Y/Z sensor of the Samsung mobile device. The final goal is to generate
a tidy set of all the relevant average data for each subject and activity alone. remember that at this point the data set 
contains the information fo more than one category activity for each subject.

We proceed to use the aggregate function and set to group the average/mean value for each sensor's measurement to unique 
subject id and the unique description of each activity.

## 7. Generating .xlsx file with final tidy data set

The code for the "GCDCProject.xlsx" file is included in the "run_analysis.R" attached to the GH repository. The given format
is chosen for easy access and comparison with other final tidy data sets generated by other authors.
